# Step 0: Creating a new project
At Makers Academy, we like to stay as close to the machine as we can.  That means working from the 'command line' and not relying on 'GUI' tools.  However, your machine doesn't come preloaded with all of the tools we're going to need. This guide will assume that you've already set up your dev environment by following the steps [here](http://preparetocode.io). If not, take a moment to do so now - we'll be right here when you get back.

With that out of the way, were ready to begin setting up our project:

1. Using the command line, navigate to the place you would like your project to live. We recommend having a `projects` folder where you keep all of your work here at Makers, but how you organise your file system is ultimately a matter of personal preference.

```
$ mkdir projects
$ cd projects
```

2. create a folder for your new project called `motivational-posters`
```
$ mkdir motivational-posters
$ cd motivational-posters
```

3. from the command line, type `touch README.md` in order to create a file with that name in your project directory.

4. open your project directory in your text editor of choice.  We recommend [atom](https://atom.io/) but, again, this is all about personal preference.
```
$ atom .
```

## Step 0.1: Update the README
You'll notice that you can see the file you created in atom - `README.md`.  It's a convention of all good projects to have a README file that explains what the project is for and provides information about how to install and run the program.

If you double click the file in the tree view to the left had side of the screen, it will open for editing in the main pane.  The file has a `.md` extension, which means it is intended to be written in **Markdown**, a popular syntax for lightly styling text files.  Markdown is ubiquitous on **GitHub** [and here is a useful guide](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/).  For now though, let's just create a basic placeholder for information.  Add the following:

```markdown
# Motivational Posters

Built by [your name here]
```

Make sure you save the file.

## Step 0.2: Hello Ruby
Ruby is a programming language. If you've completed your dev environment set up, it should now be installed on your system. To test this, go to the command line and type (don't include the `$`):

```
$ ruby -v
```

(...then hit return to enter it.) You should see something like this:

```
ruby 2.6.0p0 (2018-12-25 revision 66547) [x86_64-darwin17]
```

> We'll use the `$` sign to represent the command line prompt and to differentiate commands you should enter from output you should see.

This tells us the currently installed version of Ruby (which we requested by passing `-v` to the `ruby` command).

### Writing a Ruby program
Create a file in your directory called `hello.rb`.  By convention, Ruby files have the extension `.rb`.  The benefit of this convention is that your text editor will provide Ruby **syntax highlighting** for all files with the `.rb` extension.

Open the file in the editor and add the following content:
```ruby
puts 'Hello Ruby'
```

See how syntax highlighting works?  The text editor recognises the Ruby language and uses colours to differentiate elements of the 'grammar'.  You may see different colours depending on your chosen theme.

Save the file.  Now go to the command line and enter the following:

```
$ ruby hello.rb
```

This tells the Ruby engine to run the code in `hello.rb`.  You should see the following output:

```
Hello Ruby
```

You've just written a command-line program: you run it from the command line and it outputs to the command line!

[Home](/) | [Continue to Step 1](/steps/1.md)
